+++
title="Invitation to celebrate Negro Day"
published="9 June 2014"
description="Delicate, sometimes harmonious but mostly antagonistic dance
of science and organised religion."
+++


Hello Everyone,

As some of you know, my father had a recurrence of cancer last May and
received radiation and chemotherapy thereafter. I am very happy to
inform you that the cancer is under control and there are no signs of
relapse as of the last scan. He received treatment under what is known
as the "Negro Protocol".

During his treatment and since then, I have had a very disconcerting
experience regarding the attitude of people towards medical treatment.

Right from the outset, we received various kinds of "prasaad"
from various temples affiliated to different (hindu) deities.  Various
family friends and relatives have suggested numerous rituals and pujaas
to ward off future illness. It seems, just being *good* to fellow human
beings is not enough for the GODs.

The sad part is that most of the people suggesting all these things are
very kind and generous souls. They have been long standing family
friends or relatives. It will be disrespectful to reject their innocuous advice
outright keeping in mind their good intentions. So most part, I have
followed it.

However, such advice can prove detrimental to patients health at times.
A very shocking example of this was witnessed by me when one of
my close relatives was diagnosed with stage IV breast cancer. She
received treatment for 2 years from the doctors. All possible things
were tried and finally doctors suggested only palliative care. At this
stage, her family members took her to a so called *Baba* who claimed
cure for everything (including cancer) if a two week regimen of
chanting etc. was followed.

  + All medication (including the pain killers) was stopped. I cannot
    even begin to imagine the pain a terminal cancer patient feels if
    the pain killers are stopped.

  + The patient was kept in a dark room (no kind of light whatsoever)
    for two weeks and was advised to shun all human contact
    as well. I can safely say that this is a barbaric treatment for
    anyone, especially considering the fact that she had only a
    few months to live.

I think that most of her caretakers were not very keen on the treatment.
However, only because it had a stamp of *religion* on it, it was never
really strongly questioned. Had the same treatment been advised by a
medical doctor, he would have had to explain his actions ad infinitum to
her caretakers.

This is when I realised that this sort of blind faith has to be
questioned at all places no matter how harmless it appears.

At the same time no one seems to be interested in knowing about the people
whose research and work contributed towards the treatment of my father.
It is somehow ingrained in everyone that science in general, and people
working towards studying and treating various ailments do not require
any gratitude. Since a person is paying the doctors administering the
medication, there is no need to acknowledge the people whose tireless
work resulted in these treatments. I realise that most people working in
medical research are not working to help other people. I expect that
like all other professions, they are motivated by a promotion, peer
recognition or permanent tenure. However, I believe that, by nature,
serious research cannot be performed unless the person cares about
his/her work and as such they deserve our gratitude.

There is not much that I can do to change anyones attitude. In fact, I am
not even interested in doing so. However, I do want to do my bit towards
spreading the scientific outlook towards life that I myself cherish. So
I have decided to celebrate 10th June as the "Negro Protocol" day from
now on. Here Negro is just a totem and represents all the work done by
innumerable people towards managing cancer.

